Ok, for the Felix Xmas 2019 issue, I thought about adapting the old
Invicta Mastermind game (guessing a secret code of colours) into a
non-interactive puzzle.  I started with the Mastermind game itself:

01.playgame:

contains the original (December 2000) Mastermind Game, written in ANSI C,
using low level X-Windows (Xlib) graphics, in which the computer makes
up a random secret code, and the human attempts to guess it.  This was in
turn based on an earlier version written in Modula-2 in 1992 by me and
my colleague Peter Cutler, using the same X-windows graphics library.

To adapt this interactive game ("my first guess is X; that scores 2 blacks and
2 whites", ok, my second guess is Y; that scores 3 blacks and 2 whites") into a
non-interactive puzzle that could be printed in Felix, I wondered about
finding a partial Mastermind game in which after N guesses and their
scores, there would only be ONE consistent next guess - which would
inevitably be the secret code.  I also wanted to find a SHORT partial
Mastermind game, one with (say) only two or three prior guesses and
their scores.

02.genpuzzle:

contains my freshly written program to find-a-partial-Mastermind-game-with
a-single-next-guess.  See inside for more details of how to generate short
Mastermind-as-puzzle games.

After running 02.perl-puzzle/genpuzzle several times, the best
Mastermind-as-puzzle game I found was:

	shortest=3, secret=bybpr,
	guesses=byprg,brbpg,bbypg,
	scores=2-2, 3-1, 2-2

i.e. guess Blue-Yellow-Pink-Red-Green first, which scores 2b+2w,
then guess Blue-Red-Blue-Pink-Green second, which scores 3b+1w,
then guess Blue-Blue-Yellow-Pink-Green third, which only scores 2b+2w.

This game is summarised in     03.xmas-felix-puzzle

The next step was, of course, to generate a pretty picture showing the
xmas-felix-puzzle game.

04.display-xmas-felix

contains my attempts to do this.  The only easy way to do that was for me
to adapt my original C game code, fixing the secret code as BYPRG, restricting
the maximum number of guesses to 4, recompiling it and then manually entering
the first 3 guesses.  The computer, knowing the secret code, automatically
regenerated the scores and displayed them - of course I checked manually
that they were correct.

I then took a screenshot (felixpuzzle.ppm), converted it to a PNG and
sent it to the good folks at Felix.  That was good enough at the time,
but when it appeared in Felix it was disappointingly pixelated.  ie. the
original game user interface was not high enough resolution.

In order to explain the game fully, I came up with five simple 3-hole 3- and
4- colour Mastermind puzzles, and 04.display-xmas-felix/5-simple-puzzles
contains a LaTeX document describing the rules, incorporating screenshots
of each puzzle.  The PDF of this document was installed in my personal
web page, and the Felix writeup linked to that document.

Over New Year, I happened to spent some time writing Postscript programs
to solve several unrelated puzzles, so regained some familiarity with just
how much of a full-blown programming language Postscript really is.

Early in January, I suggested to the Felix puzzle team that we investigate
setting more Mastermind-as-puzzle puzzles in future Felixes, and as a result
I wondered how hard it would be to reproduce the original graphical game
layout direct in Postscript, at the maximum possible resolution that
Postscript can achieve:

05.newdisplay

contains my (successful) attempt to do this.  After building a series of
debugging stages, and a depressingly large amount of time spent bludgening
Postscript into shape, I got all the necessary functions ported into
Postscript and working.  I then spent quite a bit of time making it simpler
to display a particular made up puzzle.

I ended up with a Perl script "makeps.pl" that parses the final line of
02/genpuzzle/genpuzzle output and then generates a displayable EPS image
of that particular puzzle, and a separate EPS image of it's secret code.

Using "makeps.pl", one might generate, store and view [if "gv" is installed]
a single Mastermind puzzle with 4 holes and 4 colours (RGBY) in good4x4/1.eps,
and it's secret code in good4x4/1s.eps, all via:

../02.genpuzzle/gen4-4 | ./makeps.pl good4x4/1

Similarly, to generate, store and view a puzzle with 5 holes and 5 colours
(RGBYP) in good5x5/1.eps, and it's corresponding secret code in good5x5/1s.eps,
just run:

../02.genpuzzle/gen5-5 | ./makeps.pl good5x5/1

The good4x4 and good5x5 directories contain several reasonably challenging
puzzles.  In those directories, X.eps is the game, and Xs.eps the secret code,
while X.ps is the pure-Postscript version of the game, and Xs.ps the
pure-Postscript version of the secret code, and X.inc is the Postscript-with-
includes version of the game, and Xs.inc the Postscript-with-includes version
of the secret code.

One thing that is still quite hard is to estimate the hardness of a
particular Mastermind puzzle, i.e. the amount of time that a typical solver
might take to solve it.

Using "makeps.pl", one might generate, store and view [if "gv" is installed]
a single Mastermind puzzle with 4 holes and 4 colours (RGBY) in eek.ps via:

../02.genpuzzle/gen4-4 | ./makeps.pl eek

and generate, store and view a puzzle with 5 holes and 5 colours (RGBYP) via:

../02.genpuzzle/gen5-5 | ./makeps.pl eek

The 05.newdisplay/good4x4 and 05.newdisplay/good5x5 directories contain
several reasonably challenging puzzles, that I think should be moderately
interesting to solve.  Note that the secret code is embedded in the generated
Postscript files as a comment. To see all the secret codes:

grep Shhhhhhh good*/*.ps

One thing that is still quite hard is to estimate how hard a particular
Mastermind puzzle will be, i.e  the amount of time that a typical solver
might take to solve it.  I don't think I can automate that:-)

			Duncan C. White, Jan-Feb 2020
